the international Criminal Court's top
prosecutor is seeking arrest warrants
for Israel's prime minister as well as
three Hamas leaders Karim Khan says the
men all bear responsibility for war
crimes and crimes against humanity
related to the war in Gaza and the
October 7th Terror attacks in
Israel Yahya sinir is hamas's leader in
Gaza he's one of the men targeted by the
ICC arrest warrant request so is this
ish Han the qar based political leader
of Hamas the third is hamas's military
strategist Muhammad DF the icc's top
prosecutor says he has reasonable
grounds to believe the three are
responsible for war crimes and crimes
against humanity committed on and after
October the 7th murder as a crime
against humanity and as a war
crime The Taking of hostages as a war
crime rape and other acts of sexual
violence during captivity as crimes
against humanity and as war
crimes torture during captivity is a
crime against humanity and is a war
crime Khan is also requesting an
International arrest warrant for
Israel's prime minister Benjamin
Netanyahu and his defense minister yuav
Galant 7 months into the war he thinks
the two who bear direct responsibility
for war crimes and crimes against
humanity committed in Gaza including
using starvation as a weapon of war and
intentionally directing attacks against
a civilian
population Israel like all states has
the right to defend its population it
has every right to ensure the return of
hostages that have been criminally and
callously
taken those rights ever do not absolve
Israel of its obligations to comply with
International humanitarian
law NYU rejects the
accusations as prime minister of Israel
I reject with all my soul the comparison
made by the prosecutor in the he between
Democratic Israel and the mass murderers
of Hamas this is a complete Distortion
of
reality Israel is not a member of the
ICC and doesn't recognize its
jurisdiction but if warrants are issued
which may take months those named could
face arrest if they travel to one of the
Court's 124 member states which include
most of Europe but not the United
States we're joined Now by Chile Ebu uji
who served as president of the
international criminal court from 2018
to 2021 welcome to DW Mr oi I want to
start by asking you that does the fact
that these warrants are being sought
already mean that there is sufficient
evidence
that must be what the um prosecutor sees
the prosecutor must present to the uh
three judges of the pre-trial division
uh evidence that shows that there is
reasonable grounds to believe that the
people are being sought in the arrest
waren um committed International crimes
or responsible for international crimes
so must he would not be moving forward
if he didn't believe have evidence he
believed to be strong enough to sustain
such a move it's up to the judges to
decide whether or not they agree with
him of course but then so in your
experience do you think these warrants
are likely to be granted
then I cannot second guess that I mean
it would mean prejudging question
the um what I can tell you however is
that um in my experience um both as a
prosecutor before being a judge a
prosecutor Rwanda genocide tribunal
special court for seran and so on and as
an academic teaching this um many people
have been tried and convicted for less
than what we've seen in the media so
far well we know that Israel and and the
US have called this move outrageous we
heard in that report that it equates a
country defending itself with the
terrorist organization but as you just
pointed out that others have had warrant
for less than what you've seen so far
but what do you what's your reaction to
that assertion that it's not a fair
comparison that's not how you look at it
you this is a political statement the
legal statement is do we have a law and
what does thatan laws say when you look
at what that law says and then you
compare it with the evidence then you
make you come to a legal conclusion you
don't um telling calling somebody
terrorist or not doesn't it's neither
here nor there in that legal calculation
even uh Democratic states some leaders
of Democratic states have been known to
do things that they should not do um
Hamas yes carried out a horrid attack
attack on the on the 7th of October in
which 1,200 people um died the killed uh
so far the um idea of operation has
resulted in the deaths of more than
34,000 people that mathematics um there
already tells you that there is
something wrong that needs to be looked
into well we also know that crimes
against humanity is a very serious
accusation especially against a Serving
Leader and we also know that the ICC has
already faced criticism for not issuing
similar warrant against leaders like
serrian President Bashar Al Assad or
Iran supreme leader Ali K do you think
that undermines the icc's
credibility not at all that again there
are things to be looking at here the um
in the situation in um relating to
Israel has to do
with paltin being a neighboring state
and
Palestine being a state party to the
Rome statute and the Rome statute gives
the IC
jurisdiction over crimes committed on
the territory of a state party you don't
have the same with um Syria you don't
have the same with Iran of course if you
have the same with Syria or Iran you'll
be seeing the same name configuration
the closest comparison you may look at
maybe Myanmar for instance Myanmar not a
state party to the Rome statute but
Bangladesh is a state party to the Rome
statute but when
ringas were driven out of Myanmar into
uh Bangladesh because Bangladesh is a
state party to the Rome statute that was
a basis for the court to exercise
jurisdiction over the matter so that's
the closest comp comparison not um Syria
not Iran if you have neighboring states
who decide to join um the Rome St
neighbors of Syria or Iran and then the
effects of that war seen on the
territory of those States then you can
be saying well what about that that's a
really interesting clarification that
you just made there but I want to Circle
back to what you said about the
political statements before we go uh
we've seen that different leaders react
based on who is being charged we saw
that the reaction to the ICC warrant
against Russian President Putin for
example was widely applauded we're
seeing criticism here do you feel like
that hobbles the reach and that that
hobbles the actions of the
ICC well the that cannot be a blame on
the ICC at all the the the the blame for
that will be on those who will make that
kind of calculation decide on the
political basis um what indictment they
support and what not you cannot blame
the international criminal court for
that for what politics States choose to
play oh yes uh I I just mean to say not
so much to blame the IC but to ask does
that limit its ability to function as
it's meant
to of course it does definitely so when
you have States who play politics with
the rule of law yes it does constrain
the ability of the rule of FL now um
when I write and talk about this thing
there's somebody whose views we must
always take into account in 1945 April
1945 two days or so before he was
appointed as the chief prosecutor of the
United States for nurenberg Mr Justice
um Robert H Jackson gave a speech to the
American Society of international law in
which he said look we cannot have a rule
of law that operates on the basis of our
National interest for basis of what we
wanted to do for us International rule
of flaw for it to have meaning and
effect in protecting the world and
humanity and even the Americans he said
needs to applied even-handedly
impartially regardless of who um you're
looking at as your allies or as your
enemies some fascinating insights there
thank you so much for laying that out so
clearly for us Chile e uji a former
president of the international criminal
court
thank
you I'm joined Now by Jeffrey nce he was
a prosecutor at the international
criminal Tribunal for the former
Yugoslavia he was lead prosecutor at the
trial of sodan mosovich he joins me
tonight from Canterbury England Mr Nice
it's good to see you again is the ICC
Prosecutor's request is it a done deal I
mean will the arrest warrants in your
opinion will they be
issued well of course I can't answer
that question because I'm not the judge
and I have haven't seen all the evidence
but Mr khah has indicated that he's set
himself a higher than normal standard
whether the judges will apply that or
not uh in order to be satisfied that the
evidence could lead to a conviction he's
also I know taken independent advice
from a body of experts acting pro bono
and sort of behind the scenes to check
on whether he may have made any mistake
so it's pretty likely that the evid he's
presented will be strong whether it's
strong in respect of all five or some of
them we can't decide but I think it's
quite likely that just simply from what
he tells us about the way he's done his
work yeah that you may get some of these
arrest warrants issued yes you you say
that this these are the higher standards
for this case what do you understand um
under higher
standards well as he explained in the
indiv he gave with Christian
amanpur
um
he
didn't rest on the reasonable grounds to
believe
level he relied on a reasonable Prospect
of conviction level which is a bit
higher now all these standards are easy
to State and hard
to test but what he's saying is okay
here's the standard of the court and
I've made my standard a bit higher than
that so and that's a sort of responsible
approach to take in an issue as
sensitive as
this we heard from US President Joe
Biden this evening he said that this
announcement was outrageous and he said
that we are dealing here with um false
equivalencies that you should not even
try to compare Hamas with the government
or the of Israel I mean does he have a
point there did the prosecutor did he
have to make this announcement today did
he have to announce that that he was
seeking an arrest warrant for Israeli
leaders in the same breath that he said
he's seeking arrest warrants for Hamas
leaders why do it
together well he certain he didn't have
to he could have done it on different
days on the other hand if if he'd only
decided to do it on different days for
political
appearance reasons that would have been
pretty unsatisfactory as well I don't
know what happened inside the office
that led them to look at the situation
and to decide that these five requests
for warrants could be made um but I
don't see that there's any question of
his trying to assert moral equivalence
he simply said here's the law here's the
people on each side who for the time
being I'm going to ask warant should be
issued so Biden's response is you know
political response as is the following
bit of the statement I think from
blinken where they say that no efforts
have been made to allow or no sufficient
efforts have been made to allow Israel
to deal with these matters
themselves
overall I think that it's unwise both
America and Great Britain if it does it
and Germany if it does it to start
speaking against what the prosecutor has
done we all have to
remember that the reason things like
this happen is because we have
incompetent politicians who make
terrible mistakes whether they're the
politicians in Israel Gaza Hamas
whatever you like or the politicians
who've been sitting around them for the
last century and 20 years seeing the
creation of the state of Israel and
doing whatever they've done not to
succeed Ed in heading off this huge
foreseeable tragedy so we got lousy
politicians or bad politicians you may
think and it doesn't really sit very
comfortably in their mouths when they
didn't stop this happening by creation
for example of a one-state solution for
Israel and Palestine or for a two-state
solution when they let it drift for so
many years doesn't sits very easily in
their mouths now to complain when an
independent body composed of uh
professional people who've got no
interest in selling their integrity for
some political objective whose only
interest will be in getting the job done
well doesn't sit easily in the
comfortable in the mouths of uh
supporting parties such as the United
States be off hand in condemnation of
What's Done Mr let me pick up on that
you know you say that the prosecuting
attorney that they they're using higher
than higher standards than they normally
would and that they are handling this
case with the utmost care then certainly
the decision to announce that they're
seeking arrest warrants for these
leaders Hamas and Israeli leaders
announcing that together there has there
had to be a reason there had to be a
decision to do that and to have it seen
together for public consumption do you
agree no I don't even understand your
question because it's you who've got to
justify the question why should
decisions on a different day I'm saying
that nothing is up to chance nothing is
up to chance I think that the prosecutor
knew exactly what he was doing and I'm
trying to ask you what why do you think
he did what he did today by grouping
them
together I don't know but if you put
yourself in his
position and he looks at the evidence in
the round all of it favorable
unfavorable Hamas
Israel and he sets his team to work and
his team come back and say well here's
the evidence that looks like it's this
these two and these three against whom
there's enough evidence and then
probably they had a review and then they
have a discussion with their independent
panel of experts and they come to the
conclusion that this three and this two
should be indicted it would be a bit of
political window dressing of the worst
kind to choose to go for one first and
the other second and which one should go
first I I'm afraid I don't follow your
question but by all means go ask Mr Khan
um if he wants to answer you I don't
know whether he will but ask him well
why did you not do it on different days
and see what he says well well I can't
ask him tonight but I'm glad that I had
you to ask um another brilliant legal
mind Mr Jeffrey nce always good talking
with you we appreciate your time and
your analysis tonight thank you you're
welcome all right I want to go now to
our correspondent a Ibrahim she's in
Jerusalem covering this story for us I
so talk to me about the reaction that
we're getting out of Israel we just
heard the the Prime Minister
there the tradeit he has now uh
commented and this came after a series
of reaction reactions from senior
Israeli political uh figures in addition
to the Prime Minister uh calling uh this
move by the ICC prosecutor disgraceful
he has also accused the prosecution of
anti-Semitism which is an accusation
that has come out of political
leadership time and again throughout the
this war against multiple International
bodies whenever Israel finds itself uh
in a position to be in a position where
it's accused of things like uh uh war
crimes or even when it's subject to
heavy uh criticism um in addition to the
Prime Minister we've also heard from the
president uh who is seen as sort of the
spokesperson for the spirit of the
nation if you will uh we've heard from
the Israeli foreign minister Israel cats
all condemning uh uh this move or this
um this move by the ICC prosecutors
seeking the arrest of Netanyahu and
Galant we've also heard from Israeli
opposition on this who have been very
critical of the Prime Minister and his
government and the conduct of the war
but in this issue they sort of uh voice
the same concerns as the Prime Minister
we've heard from y y Leed the uh leader
of the opposition who completely
rejected uh this idea this notion that
Israeli uh leader ership and Hamas
leadership can even be mentioned in the
same breath because of course the
prosecutor while he didn't make a direct
comparison between them he did uh he is
seeking arrest warrants for both Hamas
and Israeli leadership in the same
statement and Israel does not recognize
the jurisdiction of the international
criminal court so what impact is this
going to have if
any right now the prosecution is uh
seeking an arrest warrant so there's no
arrest warrant yet so effectively this
doesn't really uh hinder or limit the
movement of the Prime Minister or his
defense uh Minister but if we were to
arrive at a situation where there is
indeed an arrest warrant this would
limit the movement of these two uh
senior Israeli uh politicians if they
were to find themselves in a country
that does recognize the jurisdiction of
the ICC that country would be uh
obligated to facilitate their arrest and
their transfer uh to uh the ha but this
is uh you know one of the late latest
the latest of me of a series of
diplomatic blows to Israel on the global
stage um you know in reaction to how it
has uh chosen to conduct uh this war DW
Z Ibrahim with the Ladi tonight from
Jerusalem Aya thank you